# Genomics:

In this practical, we aim to walk you through the entire process from raw data to the list of variants.

## Data
The study we are going to get our data from is “Maternal age effect and severe germ-line bottleneck in the inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA”. The study has uploaded the short reads it produced in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra?term=SRP047378

SRA is a bioinformatics database that provides a public repository for DNA sequencing data, especially the "short reads" generated by High-throughput sequencing, which are typically less than 1,000 base pairs in length. The SRA not only provides a place where researchers can archive their short read data, but also enables them to quickly access known data and their associated experimental descriptions (metadata) with pin-point accuracy.

> [!TIP]
> Let's check out the file we are going to use. This command will display the first 10 lines of the fastq file without opening the entire file. Remember, our files might be too big to open the entire file in a normal text editor as these editors usually load the entire file into memory at once which isn’t always possible. head (and its counterpart tail) is therefore a good command to briefly check if the files look like they’re supposed to. One read in a fastq file consists of 4 lines and looks something like this:
```
head reads.fastq
```

the first line is the name of the sequence, the second line depicts the actual reads, the third line gives a sequence identifier and the length of that read, and the fourth line encodes the Phred scaled quality scores. 


> 
> Below is the link to the sra-toolkit. Explore it, when you have time:

https://github.com/ncbi/sra-tools/wiki/01.-Downloading-SRA-Toolkit  


## Pre-processing: 

> [!TIP]
> This step is executed by the nextflow pipeline, when you run it on gitpod. All the results are created under the results folder. Wherever you see a Tip sign, check them out yourself. Mostly they are simple tasks for you to understand what the genomics pipeline does, how do the outputs of each step look like.   

### Trim and filter the reads
 
The large variation in quality scores and the identified biases in sequence content per base should be dealt with before we proceed with our analyses. We do this in two steps. First, we remove the low quality bases at the beginning and the end of the reads (trimming). In a second filtering step we remove all reads that have a high number of low-quality base calls in the middle section. 

For the trimming: We remove the first 20 bases (-f 20) and that the last position to be kept in the read is 240 (-l 240).

For the filtering: We filter out the dataset for reads that have more than 95% (-p 95) of bases above a sequencing quality of 30 (-q 30). All reads that do not fulfil this criterion are discarded.

> 
> If you have time explore what each paramater does: http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/commandline.html List two commands that look potentially useful. 

### Check out the Quality
Each character there represents a quality value. Phred quality scores Q are defined as a property, which is logarithmically related to the base-calling error probabilities P. For example, if Phred assigns a quality score of 30 to a base, the chances that this base is called incorrectly are 10^((-30)/10)=0.001. This means that 1 out of 1000 calls with this quality score is actually wrong. Most studies put the threshold of base quality at 20 or more ideally at 30.

> [!TIP]
> Compare the read sequence before and after trimming and filtering. The pipeline we will use will create html files for each reads file you have under the results folder. Open these html links by right clicking on them and choosing open with Live Server. 

In these files, some general statistics about the sequences are displayed.
- The basic statistics are some very basic facts about your sequence library such as the number of reads, GC content and sequence lengths. The number of reads in the library is usually the first thing to look at. Although it is no guarantee for good data, a high read count is usually a good sign.

> [!TIP]
> Click on “Per base sequencing quality” on the left. A boxplot is displayed. On the x-axis you can see the position within the read and on the y-axis the phred scaled quality score distribution across all reads at this position.
•	What do you notice regarding the shape of the curve?

The pattern we see here is quite common for illumina short read libraries: The read quality is slightly lower at the beginning and at the end of the read. We see the consequences of these lower sequencing quality scores when we look at the “Per base sequence content” (select the report via the list on the left). This report illustrates the frequency of each base across all reads on this position.

 •	When looking at the report, what do you notice concerning the base frequencies and how does it connect to the overall quality graph above? What differences do you notice between plots? Why do you think?
  
•	We do not want to use bad quality base calls for our alignments and variant calling later on. Why? What would be the risk if we DID use all reads despite low sequencing quality?

•	Why do you think it makes sense to do the trimming first?
•	Could/should you trim more based on your graphs? What do you think?

> 
> This is the website of the program we used: https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/
  
### Alignment to the reference genome

Aligning reads to a genome can be viewed in the general context as string matching. The goal is to find a pattern (the short-read) in a large text (the reference genome), allowing for mismatches and indels. Naively, you can scan the text for the pattern but this is inefficient. There are techniques to pre-process (or index) the text to make queries fast and also that can even compress the size of the text. Bowtie2 uses this technique for ultrafast and memory-efficient aligment of sequencing reads to long reference sequences, which also supports paired-end alignment modes. We use bowtie2 commands to align the short reads. 

First, you index your reference genome, so that reads are quickly aligned. 
Note that for each different toolbox like SAMTools or bowtie2, you should index your reference genome by using their own commands. 

Next you align your short reads to the reference genome, using the reference file and your filtered file. This step creates the alignment file, which is a SAM file (Sequence Alignment/Map), a human-readable TAB-delimited text format consisting of a header and an alignment section. Each alignment line has 11 mandatory fields for essential alignment information such as mapping position, mapping quality, read quality etc. After completion of the alignment, a brief report will appear in the terminal. Check it to see the total alignment rate of your reads. Finally, you convert your sam file to a bam (Binary Alignment/Map) file, which is simply a binary version of the sam file.

> [!TIP]
> Click on the alignment.txt to see your alignments.

> 
> Here you may find more information on aligment files: https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf
> 
> And these are the websites of the tools we use for alignment: 
https://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml
> 
> http://samtools.sourceforge.net/samtools.shtml

### Visualize the sequence depth
Of course we are now interested in how much of the mitochondrial genome we actually cover with our reads (and how many times we cover each position in the genome). 

> [!TIP]
> Create a scatterplot in python by using the file called depth.csv and the script Plot Depth.ipynb for this purpose. They are also in your gitpod under the genomics folder. Scroll down the left side bar to find the script and run it within gitpod.

•	What is the lowest depth in your dataset? What does it mean?

### Identify the Variants
Last step is mapping the variants between the reads and the reference genome. To this end, we will use SAMTools which provides various utilities for manipulating alignments in the SAM format, including sorting, merging, indexing and generating alignments in a per-position format. 
The aligner cannot always assign a read to its point of origin with high confidence. For instance, a read that originated inside a repeat element might align equally well to many occurrences of the element throughout the genome, leaving the aligner with no basis for preferring one over the others.

Aligners characterize their degree of confidence by reporting mapping quality, just like read quality scores. A mapping quality of 10 or less indicates that there is at least a 1 in 10 chance that the read truly originated elsewhere. Ideally, you will filter out bases with read qualities lower than 30 but also with mapping qualities lower than 10. In our case, the alignments are already good, so we skip this step. 

> [!TIP]
> We will create a variant call file Check out calls.vcf and calls.
Here is more information on the VCF files: http://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.2.pdf
